
Writing 
Step 1: Answer is relevant to the question
Do 
Make sure your ideas are directly related to the question  
Use ideas and examples that you are familiar with, and that relate directly to the topic 
Extend your answer to include a number of ideas that will support the question.  

Step 2: Answer all parts of the question

read the question carefully and decide how many parts are in it. You must answer all parts of the question.
Do: 
Read the question carefully and decide how many parts are in it 
Present your opinion and support it throughout the whole essay 
If asked to present both views, make sure each view is presented equally (similar paragraph length) 
Watch for plurals. If you are asked to give ‘advantages’, you must present a minimum of 2  
Watch for ‘and’. You may need to comment on more than one element  
Write more than 250 words.  
Don’t: 
Ignore parts of the question  
Assume that your opinion is clear, use the first person to ensure the examiner knows it’s your opinion ‘I think’  
Tell the examiner what you are going to say and what you have said

Step 3: Organise your essay logically, with clear progression using linking phrases

If you are asked to present both views and your opinion, state your opinion at the beginning of the essay and then move on to present both views. You can then come back to your own opinion and then conclude the essay. This is a logical way to present these ideas.  

Do: 
Use a range of linking words and phrases, but don’t overuse them 
Use adverbial phrases, rather than single basic linkers 
Use referencing and substitution to avoid repetition (this/them/the issue/the problem)  
Use punctuation to make your writing coherent  
Make sure your ideas are sequenced correctly  
Make sure your ideas are logical and easy to follow  
Use a separate paragraph for the introduction and the conclusion   
Use one paragraph for each idea or topic area. 
Don't: 
Overuse basic linking words like firstly (instead, try using ‘The first reason for/ The primary reason for this’)  
Start every sentence with a linker (Try to put it in the middle of a sentence. E.g. “Some people believe, however, that individuals must also take responsibility for the environment” or “I believe, on the other hand, that individuals do have a responsibility to…”)  

Step 4: Organise your essays into paragraphs

Step 5: Use less common vocabulary and spell it correctly

Do: 
Use precise word choices  
Use language that we use in everyday speech  
Use words that you understand  
Use words and phrases that are related to the topic  
Use collocation and phrasal verbs (words that go together naturally – environmental pollution | major issue | promising future) 
Don't 
Make spelling mistakes  
Make typos  
Mix up American and British spelling (You should use one or the other)  
Use a word if you don’t understand it or cannot spell it.  
Use imprecise words like ‘stuff/thing’  
Use slang like ‘gonna’  
Use old-fashioned language [the masses| denizens | myopic view | Hitherto]  
Overuse synonyms, one is enough 
Use idioms/clichés  
Use contractions (can’t, doesn’t)




Step 6: Don’t use memorised language, phrases or examples



Step 7: Use a variety of complex sentence structures
1. Understand the question.

Identify question type
Identify keywords 
Identify instruction words
2. Plan your answer.
Plan answers for up to 10 mins
4 stages:
Question analysis: answer all parts
Idea generation: ask urself questions
Structure: example:
Paragraph 1- Introduction
1- Paraphrase Sentence
2- Thesis Statement(the point that should be taken)
3- Outline Statement
Paragraph 2- Why advantages are strong
4- Topic Sentence
5- Explanation
6- Example
Paragraph 3- Why disadvantage are weak
7- Topic Sentence
8- Explanation
9- Example
Paragraph 4- Conclusion
1- Summary of main points
Vocabulary: synonyms of words in question or relevant words
Make up relevnat and specific examples to support the topic sentence

Band 7 and 8 answers have only one idea in each paragraph, and they then use the rest of that paragraph to explain and support that point.

Coherence and Cohesion Key Points
Structure your answers in logical paragraphs
One main idea per paragraph
Include an introduction and conclusion
Support main points with an explanation and then an example
Use cohesive devices accurately and appropriately
Vary your linking phrases using synonyms

Lexical Resource Key Points
Try to vary your vocabulary using accurate synonyms
Use less common question-specific words that accurately convey meaning
Check your work for spelling and word formation mistakes






Task 1: 
Bar chart:
Intro paragraph
Paraphrase the given information
Possible to comment on units of measurement

Overview
Pie charts:
Word tips:  	.. accounted for the majority of the ..
	





















Writing Task 2:
Conclusion should follow with a reason given for believing it. This reason shouldn raise any more questions(like how are they related?)

Use words like nevertheless to state ur disagreement with an idea after its supporting sentence.
Afterall for supporting
Use THUS for last sentence conclusion 	
Adding emphasis:



*vocab point: infrastructure
*furthermore


Conclusion:
First sentence: summarize the main ideas of paragraphs
Last sentence: answer the question. Which one or to what extent do u agree or disagree

Developing thinking and planning skills:
Put urself in the described situation and think about pros and cons of it and write each in a column in ur planner
4














4














Then check:
Are there enough ideas
In the organization logical or do I need to move anything
Does this argument answer this question

Example:
 for a sentence supporting ur idea in intro: there are several factors affecting the (success of such a plan)
the disadvantages of .. are significant (intro of first body par)
*thus defeating the object of the .. (to emphasize that some points might lead to the neglection of the main point.

****beginning of second par: nevertheless, these issues can be resolved.
In second par u can give reasons to why problems stated in first par might not be as imp
Second par conclusion: clearly, there is a lot to be gained from such opportunity

In conclusion: mention main ideas of both pars, last sentence: ur own view(just stating which u agree w)

*vocab: someone’s immersion in a subject: they completely involve  w it










questions that ask to discuss 2 opinions and give ur own: 
body1: pros then cons of the opinion u don agree w
body 2: cons then pros of opinion u agree w


CHECK FOR TASK RESPONSE: 
WRITING GRAMMAR POINTS
TASK 2:
 use passive but not for ur own opinion
1. Many people now use social media as a news source rather than just a way to communicate with
friends. (active)
2. Social media is now often used as a news source rather than just a communication tool. (passive)

conditional sentences
if .. would : hypothetical

dependent clause , conditional
NOTES
FOCUS ON THE MAIN ARGUMENT, USUALLY UR NOT ASKED ABOUT WHY SOME PPL BELIEVE STH BUT THE IDEA ITSELF(ONLY REFER TO THOSE IN INTRO)
In conclusion u should sum up main ideas, make sure u answered the question, make ur position clear
WRITING VOCAB FROM MODEL ANSWERS:
TASK 1:

female participation rates

then add supporting sentences with numbers


female participation generally increased with age,
while the reverse was true for males until middle age, and males experienced a lower peak than the corresponding figures for females.

the younger females generally exercised less than their older counterparts

Only from age 65 and over were
the figures for both genders near parity at 46.7% (males) and 47.1% (females).


line graph
usage of past perfect in line graph : Beef consumption began to fall in 1994 and by 2004 it had fallen from just under 200 grams to approximately 120 grams.

Although the amount of lamb consumed weekly was approximately 150 grams in the first year, by the final year it had experienced a dramatic drop,
falling to close to 50 grams.

The line graph shows variations in the weekly consumption of fish and three types of meat in one European country from 1979 to 2004.
 Although there were fluctuations , overall, people in this country consistently ate more meat than fish , and the general trend was to move away from beef and lamb as
chicken became the dominant food in this category.
In the first decade, beef was consumed in significantly higher quantities than the other foods listed. Despite an initial sharp fall to approximately 175
grams, it then recovered reaching a high of close to 240 grams per week. However, from 1989 onwards, beef consumption fell almost continually , and
by 2004 had almost halved. Lamb almost exactly mirrored this fluctuating trend, falling from second highest initially (at 150 grams) to approximately 60 
grams per week by the end of the period .
In contrast, chicken climbed from less than 150 grams in 1979 and took the lead from around 1990 onwards . Interestingly, the increases in chicken
corresponded with the declines in beef and lamb, and by 2002 chicken consumption had exceeded all previous rates, reaching approximately 260
grams a week, although this peak was not maintained .
Fish was consistently eaten the least, beginning at around 60 grams per week then dropping to below 50 grams. While it was the lowest, it remained
relatively stable for the majority of the period.


WORDS AND PHRASES:

was more common..
Sector = an area of economic activity (similar to ‘field’ in the academic world.) Examples of
sectors are: the banking sector; the tourism sector; the housing sector
Market = business or trade in a specific product (e.g. the rental market; the housing
market)
Category = a group, or system of grouping similar information or things.

marginally - slightly
*marginally but steadily
plunge : drop suddenly and sharply
declined steadily
despite this, the total..
slight decrease
massive resurgence to a high point of..
resurgence: an increase or revival after a period of little activity
recede (receding to .. ) : go or move back or further away from a previous position.
Rose significantly
Significant rise
Falling back to (recede to)
Dropped
Dramatic increase/decrease
this category retained its dominant state
moderate (slight) decline
increase -> upturn
thriving
exceeding
respectively
Slightly over/under
Approximately
Just under
Drastically
Infrastructure: the basic physical and organizational structures
When we have more vehicles than a city’s infrastructure was designed for, it leads to congestion. 
consistantly
overtake: while chicken rose considerably overtaking beef to become by
far the most consumed of these foods by the end of this period;
acute
for instance
prohibitively
saw a decline over the period

In conclusion, there was a clear upward trend in the number of households earning higher incomes, while the lower-income households saw a decrease.
Remained the smallest
minimal changes.

noticably

use while.. , from this point on..
Overall, while Arctic char dominated initially, salmon was cultivated in far greater numbers
towards the end of the period, and rainbow trout has consistently been produced the least.
increase -> surge: to increase suddenly and strongly: The company's profits have surged.

synonym for farming for fish n plants n crops : cultivated-cultivation-production
relatively stable
rose only gradually from 2012 onwards.
salmon rose exponentially in almost every two-year period.
in fact

As this figure was more
than ten times greater than the next highest
salmon overtook Arctic char, and reached a striking 13448 million in 2018, considerably
more than any other species.

Although it did increase steadily, reaching a peak of 2138 million
tonnes in 2016, this level was short-lived,
throughout
consistently - continually
use as ...
dominant
corresponding
compared two different increases by saying ‘increased to a greater degree than ’. 

workers aged 15-24 accounted for 30% of injuries




The dominant category

In my overview, I used the word ‘generally’ ( generally experienced a downward trend ). This is because the data actually increased in one year, but overall , there
was a decrease.

Despite a brief fall, car sales generally made up 4.5% of all sales between 1996 and 1997.

pie:
The pie charts show the population of Sweden and Australia broken down into …
The pie chart gives/provides a breakdown of spending …(etc.)

using fractions:
Online music sales showed the highest growth over this period increasing from a quarter (25%) to just over a third of all online sales (36%).
 The three pie charts show how a college budget was apportioned

write numbers not words:
Write 3% not three percent

Be careful not to repeat percentage and % in the same sentence as this is repetitive.

a further 7% of the budget was spent on other costs
other expenses made up a further 7% of the budget


 
the largest expense is for staff

paying staff takes up the majority of the college budget
types of fuel - fossil fuel - energy fuel
This is in stark contrast to
Yemen, where less than 6% of the population will be 60 or older.

increasing initially from 40% to 50% before declining to
45%.
the greatest portion of the budget was  allocated to
account for

maps:
modernization
development
adjacent
unchanged -> intact
facilities -> amenities
the eastern part has undergone significant development
in addition, additionally
TASK 2:
lucrative: producing great deal of profit
reap (exp financial rewards): recieve benefit
enviable lifestyle
extends beyond …
stem from
endorse sth: publicly support
*substantial: of great importance
Intrusive: causing disruption or annoyance through being unwelcome 
Compensation: sth given to sb after a loss or injury..
under constant scrutiny: being carefully examined especially in a critical way. Their behavior is under scrutiny
devastating consequences
adolescence
precise/precisely
cause very strong
disagreement among people (controversial)

**detrimental: tending to cause harm(dangerous)
implement: put an idea/decision into effect
I agree with the latter point of view
long-term short-term
in oppose to  as opposed to
in charge for  in charge of
synonym for learn: grasp
take seriously  prioritize
acquire: buy or obtain/develop a skill
devote

soak up knowledge
self-consciousness

considered as -> regarded as

there is some debate among experts (not plural)

there is some debate among experts as to whether these lessons should begin in primary or secondary school.

place -> environment
start -> embark on

At first glance*
good -> appropriate
usually -> typically
in-depth
subside: become less intense
once the pressure of exams subsides.
Social media plays an increasingly pivotal(CRUCIAL IN SUCCESS) role in our lives
develop a sense of responsibility
... is important for .. : .. relies on ...
*reprecussions: unintended consequenses some time after an event
global repercussions
Moreover
retain: keep

progression

necessary -> fundemental
qualification - credentials
rather than a standalone solution to career progression.
professional competence

interpersonal skills such as negotiation, presentation, and leadership, which are honed in face-to-face interactions
to hone skills** : to improve and refine them
interpersonal: related to relationships and communication

incentives -> motives**
its important to offer good incentives to lure young people into doing community work
Work is a major part if our lives and it is to be hoped that many find it enjoyable, challenging and stimulating, (conclusion of advantages) but it is important to recognize the need for a work-life balance and to ensure that this is put into practice. (conclusion of disadvantages)

*stimulating: encouraging 
Neglectful - reluctant
deteriorate - become progressively worse

stimulous: a thing that motivates ppl
sheer(complete) stimulus
reinforced by incentives (support by motives)

This lack of involvement is a major contributor(cause) to family breakdown, which in turn has wider repercussions in our society. (conclusion)

spelling points:
appearance
advantageous  
subconscious
mandatory
despise
volunteer

ielts 14 be badokamel benevis
baqie faqat ide pardazi kon

in terms of*

subject of energy:
emissions : greenhouse gases

produce - generate